



XMPP Working Group                                             T. Hardie
Internet-Draft                                                    Google
Intended status: Informational                               B. Trammell
Expires: December 14, 2017                                    ETH Zurich
                                                               L. Howard
                                                                 Retevia
                                                           June 12, 2017


            Terminology for Describing Internet Connectivity
                    draft-hardie-rfc4804-bis-latest

Abstract

   As the Internet has evolved, many types of arrangements have been
   advertised and sold as "Internet connectivity".  Because these may
   differ significantly in the capabilities they offer, the range of
   options, and the lack of any standard terminology, the effort to
   distinguish between these services has caused considerable consumer
   confusion.  This document provides a list of terms and definitions
   that may be helpful to providers, consumers, and, potentially,
   regulators in clarifying the type and character of services being
   offered.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 14, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  General Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Appendix A.  Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Introduction

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: 4084 introduction below]

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: Much of this text is JCK's, and he should be credited
   appropriately.]

   Different ISPs and other providers offer a wide variety of products
   that are identified as "Internet" or "Internet access".  These
   products offer different types of functionality and, as a result,
   some may be appropriate for certain users and uses and not others.
   For example, a service that offers only access to the Web (in this
   context, the portion of the Internet that is accessible via the HTTP
   and HTTPS protocols) may be appropriate for someone who is
   exclusively interested in browsing and in Web-based email services.
   It will not be appropriate for someone who needs to download files or
   use email more frequently.  And it is likely to be even less
   appropriate for someone who needs to operate servers for other users,
   who needs virtual private network (VPN) capabilities or other secured
   access to a remote office, or who needs to synchronize mail for
   offline use.

   Recent and rapidly evolving changes to the Internet's email
   environment have led to additional restrictions on sending and
   retrieving email.  These restrictions, most of them developed as part
   of well intentioned attempts to prevent or fight unsolicited mail,
   may be imposed independently of the service types described below and
   are discussed separately in Section 3.





Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


   This document describes only the functions provided or permitted by
   the service provider.  It does not and cannot specify the functions
   that pass through and are supported by various user-provided
   equipment.

   The definitions proposed here are of little value if service
   providers and vendors are not willing to adopt them.  The terms
   proposed are intended not to be pejorative, despite the belief of
   some members of the IETF community that some of these connectivity
   models are simply "broken" or "not really an Internet service".  The
   mention of a particular service or model in this document does not
   imply any endorsement of it, only recognition of something that
   exists or might exist in the marketplace.  Thus, the Best Current
   Practice described in this document is about terminology and
   information that should be supplied to the user and not about the
   types of service that should be offered.

2.  General Terminology

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: 4084 terminology text below.  We should expand this
   with additional classes relevant in the enterprise space: dark fiber,
   lit service, mpls tunneling.  We should expand it with a description
   of common cellular access properties.  It's not clear to me that the
   split of general/additional terminology is useful given developments
   in the last decade, and the characterization of NAT as a seurity
   feature is a quaint reminder of the age of the great works.  Perhaps
   rephrasing these as properties, then defining a few "macro" classes
   based on specific combinations of those properties, is a useful
   approach?]

   This section lists the primary IP service terms.  It is hoped that
   service providers will adopt these terms, to better define the
   services to potential users or customers.  The terms refer to the
   intent of the provider (ISP), as expressed in either technical
   measures or terms and conditions of service.  It may be possible to
   work around particular implementations of these characteristic
   connectivity types, but that freedom is generally not the intent of
   the provider and is unlikely to be supported if the workarounds stop
   working.

   The service terms are listed in order of ascending capability, to
   reach "full Internet connectivity".

   o  Web connectivity

   This service provides connectivity to the Web, i.e., to services
   supported through a "Web browser" (such as Firefox, Internet
   Explorer, Mozilla, Netscape, Lynx, or Opera), particularly those



Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


   services using the HTTP or HTTPS protocols.  Other services are
   generally not supported.  In particular, there may be no access to
   POP3 or IMAP4 email, encrypted tunnels or other VPN mechanisms.

   The addresses used may be private and/or not globally reachable.
   They are generally dynamic (see the discussion of dynamic addresses
   in Section 3 for further discussion of this terminology and its
   implications) and relatively short-lived (hours or days rather than
   months or years).  These addresses are often announced as "dynamic"
   to those who keep lists of dial-up or dynamic addresses.  The
   provider may impose a filtering Web proxy on the connections; that
   proxy may change and redirect URLs to other sites than the one
   originally specified by the user or embedded link.

   o  Client connectivity only, without a public address.

   This service provides access to the Internet without support for
   servers or most peer-to-peer functions.  The IP address assigned to
   the customer is dynamic and is characteristically assigned from non-
   public address space.  Servers and peer-to-peer functions are
   generally not supported by the network address translation (NAT)
   systems that are required by the use of private addresses.

   Filtering Web proxies are common with this type of service, and the
   provider SHOULD indicate whether or not one is present.

   o  Client only, public address

   This service provides access to the Internet without support for
   servers or most peer-to-peer functions.  The IP address assigned to
   the customer is in the public address space.  It is usually nominally
   dynamic or otherwise subject to change, but it may not change for
   months at a time.  Most VPN and similar connections will work with
   this service.  The provider may prohibit the use of server functions
   by either legal (contractual) restrictions or by filtering incoming
   connection attempts.

   Filtering Web proxies are uncommon with this type of service, and the
   provider SHOULD indicate if one is present

   o  Firewalled Internet Connectivity

   This service provides access to the Internet and supports most
   servers and most peer-to-peer functions, with one or (usually) more
   static public addresses.  It is similar to "Full Internet
   Connectivity", below, and all of the qualifications and restrictions
   described there apply.  However, this service places a provider-
   managed "firewall" between the customer and the public Internet,



Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


   typically at customer request and at extra cost compared to non-
   firewalled services.  Typically by contractual arrangements with the
   customer, this may result in blocking of some services.

   Other services may be intercepted by proxies, content-filtering
   arrangements, or application gateways.  The provider SHOULD specify
   which services are blocked and which are intercepted or altered in
   other ways.

   In most areas, this service arrangement is offered as an add-on,
   extra-cost, option with what would otherwise be Full Internet
   Connectivity.  It is distinguished from the models above by the fact
   that any filtering or blocking services are ultimately performed at
   customer request, rather than being imposed as service restrictions.

   o  Full Internet Connectivity

   This service provides the user full Internet connectivity, with one
   or more static public addresses.  Dynamic addresses that are long-
   lived enough to make operating servers practical without highly
   dynamic DNS entries are possible, provided that they are not
   characterized as "dynamic" to third parties.

   Filtering Web proxies, interception proxies, NAT, and other provider-
   imposed restrictions on inbound or outbound ports and traffic are
   incompatible with this type of service.  Servers on a connected
   customer LAN are typically considered normal.  The only compatible
   restrictions are bandwidth limitations and prohibitions against
   network abuse or illegal activities.

3.  Security Considerations

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: write me]

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA

5.  Informative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2476]  Gellens, R. and J. Klensin, "Message Submission",
              RFC 2476, DOI 10.17487/RFC2476, December 1998,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2476>.



Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


   [RFC2663]  Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address
              Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations",
              RFC 2663, DOI 10.17487/RFC2663, August 1999,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2663>.

   [RFC7754]  Barnes, R., Cooper, A., Kolkman, O., Thaler, D., and E.
              Nordmark, "Technical Considerations for Internet Service
              Blocking and Filtering", RFC 7754, DOI 10.17487/RFC7754,
              March 2016, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7754>.

Appendix A.  Appendix

   This section contains the text of RFC 4084 (as markdown) not yet
   pulled into the main body of the document and edited.

   1.  Filtering or Security Issues and Terminology

   As mentioned in the Introduction, the effort to control or limit
   objectionable network traffic has led to additional restrictions on
   the behavior and capabilities of internet services.  Such
   objectionable traffic may include unsolicited mail of various types
   (including "spam"), worms, viruses, and their impact, and in some
   cases, specific content.

   In general, significant restrictions are most likely to be
   encountered with Web connectivity and non-public-address services,
   but some current recommendations would apply restrictions at all
   levels.  Some of these mail restrictions may prevent sending outgoing
   mail (except through servers operated by the ISP for that purpose),
   may prevent use of return addresses of the user's choice, and may
   even prevent access to mail repositories (other than those supplied
   by the provider) by remote-access protocols such as POP3 or IMAP4.
   Because users may have legitimate reasons to access remote file
   services, remote mail submission servers (or, at least, to use their
   preferred email addresses from multiple locations), and to access
   remote mail repositories (again, a near-requirement if a single
   address is to be used), it is important that providers disclose the
   services they are making available and the filters and conditions
   they are imposing.

   Several key issues in email filtering are of particular importance.

   o Dynamic Addresses.








Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


     A number of systems, including several "blacklist" systems, are
     based on the assumption that most undesired email originates from
     systems with dynamic addresses, especially dialup and home
     broadband systems.  Consequently, they attempt to prevent the
     addresses from being used to send mail, or perform some other
     services, except through provider systems designated for that
     purpose.

     Different techniques are used to identify systems with dynamic
     addresses, including provider advertising of such addresses to
     blacklist operators, heuristics that utilize certain address
     ranges, and inspection of reverse-mapping domain names to see if

   Klensin Best Current Practice [Page 5]

   RFC 4084 IP Service Terms May 2005

     they contain telltale strings such as "dsl" or "dial".  In some
     cases, the absence of a reverse-mapping DNS address is taken as an
     indication that the address is "dynamic".  (Prohibition on
     connections based on the absence of a reverse-mapping DNS record
     was a technique developed for FTP servers many years ago; it was
     found to have fairly high rates of failure, both prohibiting
     legitimate connection attempts and failing to prevent illegitimate
     ones).  Service providers SHOULD describe what they are doing in
     this area for both incoming and outgoing message traffic, and
     users should be aware that, if an address is advertised as
     "dynamic", it may be impossible to use it to send mail to an
     arbitrary system even if Full Internet Connectivity is otherwise
     provided.

   o Non-public addresses and NATs.

     The NAT systems that are used to map between private and public
     address spaces may support connections to distant mail systems for
     outbound and inbound mail, but terms of service often prohibit the
     use of systems not supplied by the connectivity provider and
     prohibit the operation of "servers" (typically not precisely
     defined) on the client connection.

   o Outbound port filtering from the provider.










Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


     Another common technique involves blocking connections to servers
     outside the provider's control by blocking TCP "ports" that are
     commonly used for messaging functions.  Different providers have
     different theories about this.  Some prohibit their customers from
     accessing external SMTP servers for message submission, but they
     permit the use of the mail submission protocol ([3]) with sender
     authentication.  Others try to block all outgoing messaging-
     related protocols, including remote mail retrieval protocols;
     however, this is less common with public-address services than
     those that are dependent on private addresses and NATs.  If this
     type of filtering is present, especially with "Client only, public
     address" and "Full Internet Connectivity" services, the provider
     MUST indicate that fact (see also Section 4).

     Still others may divert (reroute) outbound email traffic to their
     own servers, on the theory that this eliminates the need for
     reconfiguring portable machines as they connect from a different
     network location.  Again, such diversion MUST be disclosed,
     especially since it can have significant security and privacy
     implications.

     More generally, filters that block some or all mail being sent to
     (or submitted to) remote systems (other than via provider-
     supported servers), or that attempt to divert that traffic to
     their own servers, are, as discussed above, becoming common and
     SHOULD be disclosed.

   1.  Additional Terminology

   These additional terms, while not as basic to understanding a service
   offering as the ones identified above, are listed as additional
   information that a service provider might choose to provide to
   complement those general definitions.  A potential customer might use
   those that are relevant to construct a list of specific questions to
   ask, for example.

   o Version support.

     Does the service include IPv4 support only, both IPv4 and IPv6
     support, or IPv6 support only?

   o Authentication support.

     Which technical mechanism(s) are used by the service to establish
     and possibly authenticate connections?  Examples might include
     unauthenticated DHCP, PPP, RADIUS, or HTTP interception.

   o VPNs and Tunnels.



Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


     Is IPSec blocked or permitted?  Are other tunneling techniques at
     the IP layer or below, such as L2TP, permitted?  Is there any
     attempt to block applications-layer tunnel mechanisms such as SSH?

   o Multicast support

     Does the user machine have access to multicast packets and
     services?

   o DNS support.

     Are users required to utilize DNS servers provided by the service
     provider, or are DNS queries permitted to reach arbitrary servers?

   o IP-related services.

     Are ICMP messages to and from end user sites generally blocked or
     permitted?  Are specific functions such as ping and traceroute
     blocked and, if so, at what point in the network?

   o Roaming support.

     Does the service intentionally include support for IP roaming and,
     if so, how is this defined?  For "broadband" connections, is some
     dialup arrangement provided for either backup or customer travel?
     If present, does that arrangement have full access to mailboxes,
     etc.

   o Applications services provided.

     Are email services and/or Web hosting provided as part of the
     service, and on what basis?  An email services listing should
     identify whether POP3, IMAP4, or Web access are provided and in
     what combinations, and what types of authentication and privacy
     services are supported or required for each.

   o Use and Blocking of Outbound Applications Services.














Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


     Does the service block use of SMTP or mail submission to other
     than its own servers or intercept such submissions and route them
     to its servers?  Do its servers restrict the user to use of its
     domain names on outbound email?  (For email specifically, also see
     Section 3 above.)  Is the FTP PASV command supported or blocked?
     Are blocks or intercepts imposed on other file sharing or file
     transfer mechanisms, on conferencing applications, or on private
     applications services?

     More generally, the provider should identify any actions of the
     service to block, restrict, or alter the destination of, the
     outbound use (i.e., the use of services not supplied by the
     provider or on the provider's network) of applications services.

   o Blocking of Inbound Applications Services.

     In addition to issues raised by dynamic or private address space
     (when present), does the service take any other measures that
     specifically restrict the connections that can be made to
     equipment operated by the customer?  Specifically, are inbound
     SMTP, HTTP or HTTPS, FTP, or various peer-to-peer or other
     connections (possibly including applications not specifically
     recognized by the provider) prohibited and, if so, which ones?

   o Application Content Filtering.

     The service should declare whether it provides filtering or
     protection against worms or denial of service attacks against its
     customers, virus and spam filtering for its mail services (if
     any), non-discretionary or "parental control" filtering of
     content, and so on.

   o Wiretapping and interception.

     The service SHOULD indicate whether traffic passing through it is
     subject to lawful intercept, and whether the provider will make a
     proactive attempt to inform the user of such an intercept when
     such notice is legal.  Analogous questions can be asked for
     traffic data that is stored for possible use by law enforcement.

Authors' Addresses

   Ted Hardie
   Google

   Email: ted.ietf@gmail.com





Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Access Terminology                  June 2017


   Brian Trammell
   ETH Zurich

   Email: ietf@trammell.ch


   Lee Howard
   Retevia

   Email: lee@asgard.org









































Hardie, et al.          Expires December 14, 2017              [Page 11]
